Produced by Sankar Viswanathan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)

 Transcriber's note:

 1. The spelling, accents, and diacritical marks of Sanskrit words
 was not consistent through the book. These have been made
 consistent.

 2. The corrections noted in the Corrigenda on page v have been
 made in the text.

 HINDU LAW AND JUDICATURE

 FROM THE

 DHARMA-ŚÁSTRA

 of

 YÁJNAVALKYA

 In English

 WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES AND INTRODUCTION

 BY

 EDWARD RÖER, ph. D., M. D.

 AND W. A. MONTRIOU, BARRISTER.

 Calcutta:

 R. C. LEPAGE & CO., BRITISH LIBRARY.

 London:

 R. C. LEPAGE & CO., 1, WHITEFRIAR'S STREET, FLEET STREET

 1859.


PREFACE.

The immediate incentive to this undertaking was, a knowledge, or at
least a strong impression, that a connected and explanatory
translation of the rules of jurisprudence[1] in the Dharma Śástra
of Yájnavalkya was a practical want.

Such impression was coincided in, and therefore proved correct, by a
long list of local subscribers eminently qualified, by position and
experience, to decide.

Dr. Röer is responsible for the fidelity of the rendering, so far as
depends on knowledge of the Sanscrit language and literature, of Hindu
mythology and philosophy. Mr. Montriou has aided, so far as enabled by
juridical acquirements and experience. The language of translation
has, therefore, been a joint labour, often the result of much and
anxious discussion, and, if not unfrequently but a choice of doubtful
alternatives, yet, always a choice made with pains and circumspection.

The text we have generally followed is Stenzler's[2] which is based on
and selected from two MSS. in the royal library at Berlin and two
editions published in Calcutta.[3]

We have not neglected constant comparison with Stenzler's German
translation as well as with the several detached passages as
translated by Colebrooke and W. Macnaghten.

Words within brackets ( [ ] ) are not in the original text.

References to, and extracts from, the standard commentary upon
Yájnavalkya, the Mitákshará, necessarily form the staple of our notes.
All such extracts are distinguished by the initial (_M._), and the
author of the commentary we invariably refer to as, the Commentator.

At the same time, we have not blindly or implicitly followed this
commentator. In some sense all Hindu glosses are untrustworthy guides.
They assume the text to be the language of inspiration; and, as the
several Dharma Śástras not merely differ, but often dispose of the
same subject in a contradictory manner, Pandits deem it their duty to
reconcile all discrepancies, how forced soever their interpretations
may be. In passages so dealt with, we have endeavoured to give the
plain meaning of the original text.

We gratefully acknowledge the obliging assistance, in research,
enquiry, and suggestion, occasionally afforded, in the progress of
our task, by Babus, Chandra Saikhur Dev[4] and Shyámácharaṇa
Sircar.[5]

E. R.

W. A. M.

August 1858.